V C usage and compressed repertoire files (#99)
immcantation/enchantr: inst/rstudio/templates/project/repertoire_analysis_project_files/index.Rmd

suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("ComplexHeatmap"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("plotly"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("fastcluster"))

> suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("patchwork"))

Reviewer: Is `patchwork` used? If yes, add to `DESCRIPTION`.

Author: ADDED

```

# V gene usage
<div class="introduction_paragraph">

> The V gene family and V gene usage in each of the sample is represented below. Function `countGenes` from package <a href="https://alakazam.readthedocs.io/en/stable/" target="_blank">Alakazam</a> is used to calculate the count and relative abundance of V genes or families within groups. V gene usage by sequence presents the distribution of V gene in each sequence in groups. V gene usage by clone presents the distribution of the most common V gene within each clone across groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The V gene family and V gene usage in each of the sample is represented below. Function `countGenes` from package <a href="https://alakazam.readthedocs.io/en/stable/" target="_blank">Alakazam</a> is used to calculate the count and relative abundance of V genes or families within groups. V gene usage is represented by group, normalized by sequence or by clone.
```

v_family_plot <- ggplot(family, aes(x=gene, y=seq_freq, fill=sample_id, group=sample_id)) +
    facet_grid(. ~ locus, scales = "free_x", space = "free_x") +
    geom_bar(position = "dodge", stat="identity") +
    theme_classic() +
    ggtitle("V Gene Family Usage at Sequence Level") +
    theme(axis.text.x=element_text(angle=45, hjust=1, vjust=1)) +
    ylab("Frequency") +
    xlab("") +
    theme(legend.position = "right")

v_family_plot <- eeplot(v_family_plot, 
                  outdir=params$outdir, 
                  file=knitr::opts_current$get('label'),           
                  caption=caption)

ggplotly(v_family_plot + theme(legend.position="right"),tooltip = "text") %>%
                           layout(font = list(family = "Helvetica"))

tbl <- eetable(family, caption="V_Family_Usage_Table", outdir=params$outdir, file="V_family_usage_bySequence")
cat(
  "V family usage by sequence table can be found here: ",
  "[V_family_usage_bySequence.tsv](tables/V_family_usage_bySequence.tsv)\n"
)

```

## V gene family usage by clone
```{r v-gene-family-by-clone, echo=F, fig.width=9, fig.height=4, fig.cap=caption, results='asis'}

> caption <- "V gene family usuage by clone"

Reviewer: Typo: usage

> caption <- "V gene family usuage by clone"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
caption <- "V gene family usage by clone"
```

cat(
  "V family usage by clone table can be found here: ",
  "[V_family_usage_byClone.tsv](tables/V_family_usage_byClone.tsv)\n"
)

```

## V gene usage by sequence
```{r v-gene, echo=F, fig.width=9, fig.height=4, results='asis'}
v_gene_usage <- countGenes(db, gene="v_call", groups=c("sample_id","subject_id","locus"), mode="gene") %>%
                       arrange(sample_id, subject_id, locus)

v_gene_usage <- v_gene_usage %>%
  mutate(gene = as.character(gene))

loci <- unique(v_gene_usage$locus)

v_gene_plots <- lapply(loci, function(l) {

  p <- ggplot(
    v_gene_usage %>% filter(locus == l),
    aes(x = gene, y = seq_freq, fill = sample_id, group = sample_id)
  ) +
    geom_col(position = "dodge") +
    theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 45, hjust = 1, vjust = 1)) +
    ggtitle(paste0("V Gene Usage at Sequence Level", " (", l, ")")) +
    ylab("Frequency") +
    xlab("") +
    theme(legend.position = "right")

  eeplot(
    p,
    outdir = params$outdir,
    file = paste0("v_gene_plot_", l)
  )

  ggplotly(p)
})

htmltools::tagList(v_gene_plots)

tbl <- eetable(
  v_gene_usage,
  caption = "V_Usage_Table",
  outdir = params$outdir,
  file = "V_usage_bySequence"
)
cat(

>   "V family usage by sequence table can be found here: ",

Reviewer: Should be V gene?

Author: FIXED

  "[V_usage_bySequence.tsv](tables/V_usage_bySequence.tsv)\n"
)
```

## V gene usage by clone
```{r v-gene-by-clone, echo=F, fig.width=9, fig.height=4, results='asis'}
v_gene_usage_clone <- countGenes(db, gene="v_call", groups=c("sample_id","subject_id","locus"), mode="gene",clone='clone_id') %>%  
                       arrange(sample_id, subject_id, locus)

loci <- unique(v_gene_usage_clone$locus)

v_gene_by_clone_plots <- lapply(loci, function(l) {

  p <- ggplot(
    v_gene_usage_clone %>% filter(locus == l),
    aes(x = gene, y = clone_freq, fill = sample_id, group = sample_id)
  ) +
    geom_col(position = "dodge") +
    theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 45, hjust = 1, vjust = 1)) +
    ggtitle(paste0("V Gene Usage at Clone Level", " (", l, ")")) +
    ylab("Frequency") +
    xlab("") +
    theme(legend.position = "right")

  eeplot(
    p,
    outdir = params$outdir,
    file = paste0("v_gene_by_clone_plot_", l)
  )

  ggplotly(p)
})

htmltools::tagList(v_gene_by_clone_plots)

tbl <- eetable(v_gene_usage_clone, caption="V_Usage_by_Clone_Table", outdir=params$outdir, file="V_usage_byClone")
cat(

>   "V family usage by clone table can be found here: ",

Reviewer: Should be V gene?

Author: FIXED

  "[V_usage_byClone.tsv](tables/V_usage_byClone.tsv)\n"
)
```

# Isotype distribution
<div class="introduction_paragraph">
The isotype distribution in each of the sample is represented below. Function `countGenes` from package <a href="https://alakazam.readthedocs.io/en/stable/" target="_blank">Alakazam</a> is used to calculate the count and relative abundance of isotypes within groups. 
</div>

```{r results='asis'}
no_c_call <-  all(is.na(db$c_call))
if(no_c_call){

>   cat("Istype distribution skipped becasue no constant region is present in the sequences.\n ")

Reviewer: Typo: "Isotype"

Author: FIXED
